Parameters for each streaming job (#81)
risingwavelabs/rfcs: rfcs/0081-dynmical-config-for-stream-job.md

---
feature: Dynamic Config For Stream Job
authors:
  - "st1page"
start_date: "2023/12/07"
---

# Dynamic Config For Stream Job

> Thanks all the people took part in the discussion of https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave/issues/11929 and implantation of `stream_rate_limit`. The RFC is hight inspired by them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks all the people took part in the discussion of https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave/issues/11929 and implementation of `stream_rate_limit`. The RFC is inspired by them.
```

## Background

> Currently, we have lots of config, switch and parameter for the streaming execution. They often used for performance optimization for different workload. But they distributed different places currently.

Reviewer 2: What part of the following will be unified (replaced) with the new mechanism?

Author: I will rewrite the part later

Author: I think all the cases in the example are able to be implemented as the new mechanism, but we can implement them on-demand

Reviewer 2: For constant value I think that's easy and we can delay. 

For others that are already configurable by some mechanisms now, I'm mainly interested in migration/deprecation plan. e.g., for `OverWindowCachePolicy`, on one hand it's persisted in the plan, and on the other hand it's controlled by a session variable (but not documented yet? so less likely a large concern). 

I think unify them with the new mechanism can reduce users' mental burden. Just want to see these discussed.

Author: Good question! I will think and add the methods to migration for these different cases.

    - It is expected not to alter, which will be explained below
- stores as the global config such as 
  - `max_dirty_groups_heap_size` https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave/blob/a8aa905ef26ef8c00f55a7c5b8ce76e6a0f7b72d/src/common/src/config.rs#L801

And in future we might introduce more parameters for streaming, such as `log_store_capacity`.

In other database, those parameter is declared by session variable or session config. It is because the compute task is bounded in those batch system and it is not necessary to alter the config for a running job. But for a long-running streaming job, alter the config for a created and processing job is needed.

This RFC will introduce a dynamic config framework to make user
- can declare those configuration when create streaming job
- can alter those configuration for a long-running streaming job. 
### Non-Goals

The RFC will not concern those config can change the streaming graph and its topology, such as
- The configs that can change the plan such as `RW_TWO_PHASE_AGG`

> - The configs that can change the actor's number such as `STREAMING_PARALLELISM` (maybe we can use the same syntax to alter it later, but it will be only a semantic sugar of scale)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The configs that can change the actor's number such as `STREAMING_PARALLELISM` (maybe we can use the same syntax to alter it later, but it will be only a syntactic sugar of scale)
```

The session config of the corresponding dynamic stream config just define its default value, in other words, when the config entry is not defined in the with clause, what's the value should be.
Furthermore, do we need add a copy of a session configs in the system parameters as the default value of the session config, that is another topic and will not talked in this RFC.

## Alter dynamic configs

First to clarify, there is some parameter can not be altered such as `timezone`. Because it can change the result of the streaming query in SQL semantic. It is strange to alter such a config for a "running query", it is a little like alter mv which change the SQL statement.

User will be able to alter the dynamic stream config for specified MV or SINK with the grammar.
```SQL
ALTER [MATERIALIZED VIEW | SINK] SET parameter TO [value | 'value'];
```
The statement will send a RPC to meta. After reducing the config in the common place, it is easier to alter the config of some relations. And we need some implementation complexity trade-off here.

> 1. alter with recovery: change the configs in the meta store and trigger a recovery. Then the newly created actor will adopt the new configs.

Reviewer 3: changing config seems too heavy to apply. Though it is the easiest way, it is counter-intuitive that users change sth and get lost from the cluster, even for several seconds. 
I don't get the position for the proposal if it is an SQL command, I don't think it can alter the cluster's status.
If it is a DevOps tool, it should not be released as a command. I think meta command is a better way.

Reviewer: >  get lost from the cluster, even for several seconds.
I don't think we need to trigger the recovery, we can let user manually trigger it.

The UX will be:
1. user alters the MV: `alter materialized view mv1 with ( ... )` (perhaps need a section on the exact syntax)
2. the user receives a response + a notice: `NOTICE: Please restart the cluster with TRIGGER RECOVERY / risectl meta recovery for your changes to take effect`
3. The user runs the recovery command.

So it would be explicit and opt-in by the user

Author: > I don't get the position for the proposal if it is an SQL command.

So how about the 4th method :thinking: do you think it is acceptable if we can change the log without recovery?

Reviewer 3: yes, I think 4 is the ideal way for such change. I think there are two phases: 1) change the proto in etcd and  commit to meta, it is safe to restart the cluster, 2) tell the user that the change has been applied. 

> the user receives a response + a notice: NOTICE: Please restart the cluster with TRIGGER RECOVERY / risectl meta recovery for your changes to take effect

If so, we are encouraging the users to test with risectl, a not well-documented tool designed for advanced users and the dev team. I mean doing anything in SQL, then it should be simple and concise, without introducing extra tools or doing the devops' job.

Author: > > the user receives a response + a notice: NOTICE: Please restart the cluster with TRIGGER RECOVERY / risectl meta recovery for your changes to take effect
> 
> If so, we encourage users to test with risectl, a poorly well-documented tool designed for advanced users and the dev team. I mean doing anything in SQL, should be simple and concise, without introducing extra tools or doing the devops' job.

I guess it is more like the `ALTER SYSTEM` statement
>Values set with ALTER SYSTEM will be effective after the next server configuration reload, or after the next server restart in the case of parameters that can only be changed at server start. A server configuration reload can be commanded by calling the SQL function pg_reload_conf(), running pg_ctl reload, or sending a SIGHUP signal to the main server process.

3. alter in each executor: every stream executor must can receive the alter config barrier and adopt the new config.
4. The issue of the barrier based alter is that the barrier latency could be large and in that case, the config can not be altered in timely manner. https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave/issues/13803 
   1. So we can introduce a control channel to all the executors like this https://github.com/risingwavelabs/risingwave/pull/4834 so that the executor can get the 
   2. another method is store a config in the task local and executor should check if the config in the task local has been changed periodically(maybe with a config version). 

The second is too complex to implement and can also introduce performance performance degradation. The 4.1 control channel will intrude every executor's logic. So personally, I'd like to eliminate them first.

And the 3,4 maybe can not satisfy all the config and the executor can only change the config with recreating itself.

> I think we can implement the recovery based alter first and optimize the configs with 3 or 4.2 later.

Reviewer: +1 for recovery based alter first, and optimize with 4.

3 is easily implemented (and is currently implemented for rate limit), but it can cause delays in config change if barrier latency is high. So -1 for it.
